As a young man, having just discovered the world of psychoanalysis, it occurred to me that the study of very severe psychological disturbances might lead to an understanding of the foundational constituents of human nature. Nothing could be more interesting, I thought, than to search for a new and deeper knowledge of the human condition as a psychotherapist. I have had the good fortune to pursue this quest for half a century.
One may ask the question, What really is madness? Here is how I would sum it up. Madness is not an illness or disease, it is not a condition existing somehow inside a person, and it is not a thing of any kind having objective existence. Madness is an experience a person may have, one involving in its essential core a fall into non being. Madness is the dissolution of all order and a descent into chaos. It is the greatest catastrophe of subjectivity that can happen to a person. The felt reality of the world disintegrates and the enduring solidity and integrity of one the ongoing experience of the terror of madness sanity and into the nothingness. This is the terror of madness, and it affects all those who come into its vicinity.
How can we, as explorers of the human soul, enter this dark territory? I think we need a map of that chaos, a picture of the variations we will encounter, and some general guidelines as to how we might respond to the disastrous human situations that are encountered. Also needed are protections from how we are ourselves perceived. A terrible toll may be taken on the clinician who may be viewed as a persecutor, as a god, or even as a persecuting god. An even greater injury may be inflicted on the patient, someone already in terrible trouble who now faces being seen as insane.
Psychotherapy is a world within the world, one in which patient and therapist gaze into each others struggle with such experiences. We must know the symbols typically used to represent these states of mind, images that are often concretised or reified, that is, treated as tangible, substantial realities. We must use our understanding then to discover responses to our patients mental illnesses attributions to attack or displace our own ways of defining ourselves. The problem is that the clinician is implicated: What people show us depends in part on how we are responding to them. Human experience is always embedded in a relational context. If that response organizes itself around an objectifying psychiatric diagnosis, one can expect to see reactions to the distancing and invalidation that is involved. If those very reactions are then ascribed again to the supposed mental illness, the distancing is deepened and the disjunction rigidifies. It is important to learn about diagnostic systems, but we must not let them become our commanding, reifying viewpoints. One should be guided instead by attention to the patients own. We are still at the beginning of exploring this strange and complicated country.

In my youthful enthusiasm long ago, I imagined that a careful analysis of the fragments into which psychiatric patients disintegrate might disclose the basic elements of human nature. Although I have tried to follow through on this quest, I cannot say that I have succeeded in any literal sense. There is, however, one central discovery that has occurred as a result of my journey: myself. Amidst the shattered hearts, the broken minds, the annihilations, it is as if the pattern of my own life was somehow inscribed. Exploring the souls of my patients therefore has led me again and again to the depths and origins of my own life world. Could it be that the study of madness presents us all with opportunities to discover who we actually are? Could it also be that the effort to assist those who come to us presents us a chance to heal our own wounds as well?
I shall tell about one of my own early experiences in this connection. My first seriously challenging patient, a young woman I met decades ago, believed with all her heart that she was a part of the Holy Trinity and that she was one with God. Her story is given in the first chapter of my 2011 book, The Abyss of Madness. She and I, over the tumultuous course of our early relationship, came to an understanding of her situation as centrally relating to a catastrophe that had occurred in her childhood: the sudden suicide of her beloved father. I saw how the tragic loss had bisected her youth into before and after, into father and no father. As our shared journey continued and her healing began, I became witness to a gradual smoothing out of the traumatic bifurcation with the emergence of feelings of furious rage, of heartbreaking sorrow, of annihilating invalidation. At some point along the wayit dawned on me that in looking at her life I was also seeing an image of my own. You see, my childhood also was divided into a before and an after, the separation caused by the sudden death of my mother when I was a young boy. In coming to the tragedy that had disastrously affected my patient continuing down to the present day the rediscovery of the I in the Thou. Losing the girlfriend was different; it was a disaster beyond imagining for a boy who had so little he could call truly his own. It was the end of a life that had scarcely begun. Unspeakable agonies followed the loss, a suffering beyond all comprehension in which everything that had seemed together was now torn asunder.
This was when the vision of cosmic oneness supervened. Every atom and subatomic particle, and every galaxy supercluster came together before him, in a vast network of interdependent relations. It was a breathtakingly beautiful tapestry encompassing the totality of all existing things. People in this young man family, friends, college teachers wombs. We imagine our minds as having interiors, filled with all manner of mental contents: thoughts, desires, memories, etc, but subsisting somehow separately from a surrounding external environment. The estrangement between internal and external is paralleled by a dualism between our bodies and our minds. The universe itself, in turn, we visualize as a vast space populated by all things great and small, some of them causally interacting with one another but each of them having its own separate and solitary existence. We are hypnotized by this alienating and fragmenting atomism, regarding it as just the way things are rather than as the ontology that it is. My young man, propelled by a catastrophic experience of the disintegration of the world, broke through the trance of this philosophy to a sudden recognition of the unity of all beings. I found his thinking to be powerful, although at the time I met him he was unable to do much with it other than to cry and shout.
Working with those who dwell in the extreme range of psychological disorder presents us with dramatic signs of how our very selfhood and sense of the reality of the world are embedded in contexts shared with other human beings. One sees, for example, how the of so-called mental illness do not emanate from a wholly internal condition afflicting the isolated individual but instead vary as a function of the response that person encounters from others. When responses felt as objectification and invalidation are supplanted by experiences of being understood and included in the community of others, striking shifts occur in delusions and hallucinations, and chronic annihilation states recede C G Jung, the great psychiatrist, acknowledged this in his famous words: Schizophrenics cease to be schizophrenic at the moment they feel understood. We, as clinicians, are therefore involved in the psychological disturbances we are called upon to treat, and the wounds requiring healing in our patients are matched by the wounds we carry in our own hearts.
But there is more. The universe exists in such a way as to generate the possibility of our own coming into being, and a profound argument can be made that it is as it is in part because we are here to be aware of it. Human beings are implicated in the way in which the world becomes manifest, and at the same time the study of the cosmos is the universe becoming conscious of itself. The observer and the observed, in both the natural sciences and the human sciences, are inseparable from each other, and the constituents of reality, on smaller and smaller scales, turn out to be interdependent, entangled phenomena rather than fully separable units somehow subsisting in ontological solitude.
In other words, my young man was absolutely right. One might wonder what happened to him. It is sad. The treatment provided to him included multiple hospitalizations, extensive electroconvulsive therapy, and an ever-varying succession of antipsychotic drugs. The last time I saw him, fifteen years into this so-called treatment, he was doing poorly no girlfriend. I wonder what the outcome might have been if someone instead had been able to sit down with him and discuss what it meant that all is one. Is it not possible that good things might have emerged from such conversations?
A final thought regarding the story I have been telling: How is it that this young man, in captivity to his parents but also in a struggle to render a shattered universe whole, was a mirror in which I could find a reflection of myself? When I was a young college student, I made a discovery of my own that was very similar. In the context of an exposure to Zen Buddhism, it came to me that all dualism is false: Every one of the great contrasts in our cultureinternal external, matter spirit, masculine feminine, good evil, freedom determinism, I You death. I also see it as a precursor to the unifying theories and philosophical ideas in which I have come to believe.


