The seeds of this roundtable were planted decades ago when I began working with a woman who was diagnosed with what was then called Multiple Personality Disorder. The tragic story of her life could fill the pages of this volume, and then some. Of the many aspects of her life that moved me, the treatment she received by therapist after therapist, hospital after hospital, was both tragic and shocking. For the extremely dissociated and DID patient, providing a coherent narrative of ones understandable why well-intentioned mental health professionals, uninformed about the powerful impact of trauma-induced dissociation on the organization of consciousness, are beset with confusion and insecurity. Clinicians often find themselves at a loss about how to understand, diagnose, and treat someone who might be switching right before their eyes between different levels of consciousness and multiple self-statess life circumstance.
At the time I began working with this woman, I had an appointment as a supervising psychologist at a Manhattan medical center. I quickly realized I needed help, so I began discussing this case with several of my colleagues at work, only to find that none of them had ever had experience treating a person with MPD DID. In fact, some of them were taught that the diagnosis was fraudulent. I also came to learn that they, as well as several of my former supervisors and professors from my years of psychoanalytic training, held a jaundiced view of the very idea of MPD DID. These views were based more on theoretical grounds rather than any real experience. Ultimately, I was confronted with their scorn and criticism of the diagnosis, my patient, and my work. I began feeling isolated, dismissed, and lost, unsure of where to turn for help in understanding how to be helpful to my patientExploring Dissociation and Dissociative Identity Disorder: A Roundtable Discussion delighted to be talking about this issue close to our hearts, dissociation in general and DID in particular. All of us have been working with patients with DID for over twenty years and, we owe them special thanks and acknowledgment. To paraphrase Guntrip, the British object-relations analyst: Today trauma studies trauma objectives life threatened or witnessed that in another. DSM-IV and DSM-IV-R have tried to define trauma in such ways that are assumed to pertain to the overwhelming nature of the event. A notable problem with this view of trauma is the issue of resilience. Some people are very resilient to the kinds of events that many would be extremely harmed by, and others may suffer terribly under what would appear to be minor stress. This led to a subjective definition of trauma. The problem with this subjective view is that anything that a person finds unpleasant could be defined as traumatic. This over inclusiveness then can drain the word of any meaningful specificity.
In my book I defined trauma as as a way to transcend the problem of objective and subjective. My reasoning was related to going with a general understanding that psychic trauma is something that is overwhelming to the mind, something that is so terrible or so shocking that it cannot be assimilated by the mental frameworks, that it has torn the fabric of understanding. The mind dissociates, it develops fissures and or blank spaces within itself to accommodate the trauma. This description of trauma as seemed to work as an answer to with respect to the objective versus the subjective points of view, or the designations of or trauma.
Thank you. Other people have thoughts on this?
I think that Elizabeths the link between the two?
How do we understand the drive-by schoolyard shootings? The data from that suggest that there are some people who developed robust PTSD and werens different from one person to the next. When I lecture, I usually try to talk with the audience before my presentation to see whom going to be speaking with. I always ask if there are people from the VA hospitals, and I have one question I always ask, and that is: And the answer is always yes, so what is that about? So rather than elaborating on that, I just want to let those questions sit on the table, because I think theym not sure we have all the answers, but Inot just in a narrative form, but in nonverbal or somatic transfer of information? Theres caused by traumatic events as opposed to other sources, some of which are understandable and some of which are mysterious.
If we talk about for big trauma versus for little trauma, then I think we have to think in terms of for big dissociation and for little dissociation. Just in terms of resiliency, when we think of trauma causing dissociation, we have to keep in mind the age of onset of the particular kind of trauma. Trauma happening to a 3, 4, or 5-year-old, for example, happens within a still developing cognitive structure. A childs something important for us to keep in mind.
But even the question of resilience is complicated, right? I think that many people with DID are quite resilient in certain ways or in certain parts of themselves, and I guess for all of us, there are times that we pull through pretty well, and there are other times we kind of fall apart. Karen, what were you saying at the end of your remarks about some of those differences?
Well, that brings us to one other issue that I think would be good to clarify at the beginning. We talk about DID as a diagnosis, so I just want to go on record to say that as far as Is lives. We do need to clarify what we mean by DID. Some people with DID are more resilient and some people are less, because DID is not one thing. At the very least, if we see DID as a complex adaptation, then resilience is also determined by coexisting personality structures, other comorbidities and other relational influences.
Some people have dissociative symptoms with other diagnoses, and then we get into a debate: Is this person dissociative or is this person not dissociative? I think that intoxication or drug use, or medication can cause dissociation. Metabolic disorders can cause dissociation. So there are times when we see a person who may have a history of trauma, but the dissociation may be something medical going on, so that all needs to get sorted out. But that is clearly different than what I assume weWhat question is unresolved in our discussion in a big way, and I want to make it more complicated and more difficult for us by saying this: I think wes studies and his 2010 paper entitled with his fMRI study of the brains of kids between about 3 and 16. He shows unequivocally that these kids have altered developmental structural signs as a result of ridicule and bullying. The hippocampus doesnt develop properly, and the executive function of precuneus doesnre talking about very profound neural changes from hurtful words, so I think thereWhat I think we all go when we hear something horrible, and Is not horrible, but I think we underestimate the power of tapping on a nail a hundred thousand times versus hitting it once with a sledgehammer. If you tap on it a hundred thousand times, its a whole different process involving a kind of personal torture that goes on. So those kinds of traumatic experiences are extraordinary in their impact, but they dons an article by Lyons-Ruth , and she talks about the best predictor of adult dissociation being what Is an argument about what you need to create a dissociative disorder. How much trauma? How much emotional unresponsiveness? But I think we ought to ask the question differently, and that is: What produced the vulnerability that evokes or provokes the dissociative response? Take someone whos date raped and comes home with their clothing ripped and their hair undone, and they walk through the door of the house and Mom meets them and slaps them in the face and says, Whats response, as opposed to s your father? Oh my god!s a whole different kind of experience. So whatt necessarily traumatizing, because the person can then connect the terror of what happened with something safe, with a safe attachment, and there is a likely possibility that the mind-splitting terror and decimation of the psyche can be repaired and healed. Your analogy about the nail is a beautiful one; a nail being hit a hundred thousand times, especially if wet really take it in without developing a self-state that keeps the terror or the shame separated so that the person can continue to function. Not being able to process these terrible things weakens the personre talking about this happening in childhood.
Yes.
That these repetitive taps or experiences of neglect while the brain is developing is really what is key.
This addresses the issues and is also a theme of a Lyons-Ruththe nature of attachment, and whether or not the mother the need for attachment and the fear of the traumatizing parent. The infant and young child cant a protective barrier, like having a parent who would say, and this makes the infant much more vulnerable and less resilient.
Also, I was thinking of Winnicottgoing-on-being,going-on-being.not just with neglect, not just with abuse, but also with intrusion, with too much stimulation, or non at tunement. This can disrupt a developing sense of self.
But I wonder: It have any difficulty with what you said, Rich, but I think that sometimes, some of these things feel semantic to me in the sense that I think of it as how one responds to trauma as both the trauma and the aftermath. The aftermath is the environment, is what kind of recovery is offered, or nots chronic, or whether a one-incidents been raped that there is some trauma even if there is a great response afterward.
Oh, of course.
Right.
But I think what Rich is talking about is the development of an organization around it, so we maybe need to define trauma with the concept of organization. Bruce Perry  has written extensively about the developing brain of children who were traumatized, and really gives you a feeling for how, whether youre both saying about how the trauma affects the body; itd just like to add to what everyone is focusing on, this issue about trauma and attachment and following up on things that Karen and Shelly and Rich have said. Liotti has done a lot of work on showing that disorganized attachment underlies later dissociative disorders, but when you look at that disorganized attachment, you are really talking about response to trauma. Wet take in that the parents may be very different at different timest cohere, and different models of attachment develop. The child is really forming different organizations of self other. And thats physiological start there are differences in regulation of boundaries and stimuli that are not initially trauma based. That also is why you see such differences between individuals having the same experience and responding differently to it.
I want to respond to two things that are on the table. Ill just read what I wrote on the pad as I was thinking through whatm glad you wrote that down!
Yeah.
Really good!
I think that we are always trying to make dissociation go away, make it conscious, and replace it with something more efficient and more useful. But frankly, if you are really going to be clinically in a lot of trouble because youm still thinking about is the problem of trauma as it big little a way in which I agree with you, and then therell leave the agreement part alone, but the disagreement comes from thinking about PutnamThe Clinical Phenomenology of Multiple Personality Disorder: Review of 100 Recent Casess study that he couldnre better at this discernment of dissociative process and dissociative disorderliness than we used to be, so wemy opinion, no studyre seeing that 5 procents grow. Because in my practice, its in the subtlety of the histories. All these folks start with the statement, and it turns out to be not so normal.
Or they cans the script. Thatbig T,re listening for big stuff when it 80s led to a lot of trouble in our field in assuming trauma and hunting for it, as opposed to naturalistically letting the narrative of somebodyt find the formulation helpful, but what I was trying to talk about is a way of thinking about trauma within the context of a life. For example, a client whose mother was a Holocaust survivor and had gotten pregnant right out of a relocation camp was not prepared to be a mother. She was not enough recovered and was not a great mother to the child who came many years later. Her father was also a survivor, more intact, however he wasnt that I think, well, the Holocaust did not literally happen to her, its why I donbig T, little tm glad you donone is cultural and one is physiological. One of my thoughts about the controversies that we experienced as clinicians treating people who were mistreated as children is that in some ways the word trauma distances us from what has actually happened, muting or softening the awareness of violence. To recognize dissociative processing in adult life is to recognize the level of violence in childrens a self, and therere not talking so parallel, but basically that a lot of information is processing at the same time in the mind or brains particularly interesting to me is that it becomes a unique vehicle for understanding this complex processing because of the persistence of these separated parallel pathways, or shifting states of mind.
Just as you were speaking, or just before you spoke, I wrote something down to address the 5 procents that you were talking about, Rich, the Putnams book on dissociation, thinking about Philip Bromberg (1998, 2006, 2011) and all the work hes study had dissociative phenomena and dissociate, but when the nail gets hit a hundred thousand times, the child has to find a way to cope, and then thatre saying, Karen, I think yous mind to dissociate does not dissipate. That its brain, which will affect the way in which dissociation is maintainedt use the word rigidifies, and this is my own personal bias. I think therethis is part of their dissociative experiencet entirely see DID as a disorder.
Well, that seems like an important thing to explore. But before we do that s agreement among us, because you were sort of moving us from dissociation in general more specifically to DID. So my question is: Do people agree upon the etiology of DID? Is it extreme persistent violence in childhood of one sort or another: physical violence, sexual violence, verbal abuse, or disorganized attachment, which can be or feel violent? Is that what we think creates DID?
Is definition of invalidation and disconfirmed insecure attachment. Very important. The issue is much larger than only physical violence.
There is another distinction that needs to be made and that is that dissociation is a much larger concept than trauma, violence, mistreatment, torture. I think thatnot met be accessed.
Is model, his discrete behavioral state model that he spells out in his 1997 book Dissociation In Children and Adolescents, and is based a lot on Peter Wolffs the notion that its based on parental responsiveness to those states. Whether you invoke Christopher Bollast leave somebody out. Its no such thing as a baby, only a baby and its mother.
Right. There needs to be parental responsiveness to the childt overdo itt fall prey to the childby using what Fonagy calls in order to modulate the childt validation, confirmation, and responsivenesst bridge. They dons a problem, and with regards to Type D infant attachment there are a lot of clinicians who dond more likely call them dissociativet think this is as important as the multiple self-state model itself. We might start there as normative, and I think that may help you not feel so bad, Karen, about saying that you feel that the ideat see it as a disorder. I think I hear you. That itm really glad you brought up Putnam, because that was the beginning for me, reading Putnams talking about consciousness. So I read that and Putnam around the same time, and I thought, 
So Is life?
As you were asking the question, I was thinking about a patient of mine, many, many years ago, a former patient, who called me from the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel in a 5-year-old voice saying, t know how to drive this car.s talk about that concretely for people who are more familiar with theories of the models of the mind and multiplicity and self-states but still dons question, and to backpedal on my saying that we shouldnwhat might be called a lack of co-consciousness. This lack of co-consciousness between self-states can be difficult to discern in clinical work. So that one can work with a patient who does not bring into the session states of mind that they experience outside of the clinical work, and that is part of the reason why it can take a very long time to learn that somebody has states of mind that are not co-conscious. There was a literature review  that found it took an average of seven years for someone to be in the mental health system before a diagnosis, of what was then called MPD, was made.
But itm thinking of someone who is almost always conscious of other parts of her, and even when shet have a cacophony of voices in her head, she feels very lonely, because her identity is based on having those different identities. So it gets hard to talk about, because it is not just a question of amnesia, although that is one distinctive variety, where people are not in touch with different parts of themselves at different moments.
I think that a reasonable way to respond to this, Marg, is to talk about diagnosis. It is useful insofar as it holds in one place certain kinds of, if youTheres a lot. You know, if 20 procents have major depression s talk for a moment about the subjective experience of dissociative process, and what that does to your marbles when you try to line them up in a row, because it makes a mess. What does a 4-year-old know about depersonalization experience? Theyre up on the ceiling, theyGod, you know, theres just so weird sitting here. You look so clear, and I can see the edge of the table. What Well, they had an integrative experience. They tolerated, without noticing, that kind of perceptual disturbance forever and a day, until one day it was gone. So they dons so insidious about these processes. Theret understand these things. But I think the subjective experience really tells a lot of the story in terms of depersonalization, the five criteria that move things from normative kind of multiple self-states into the territory of trouble.
Yeah, well, I partly disagree.
What kind of partly?
Right; is it contagious? If you look at depersonalization, for example, it is an experience that in my clinical observation is very, very painful. The patients that Ive worked with do not complain about depersonalization, and some patients who, in my mind, clearly have dissociative symptoms do not complain about dissociative symptoms. Their presenting complaints are entirely different, and sometimes they have been in treatment for a long time, working on other things, and just to complicate it, for some people, the increased awareness of dissociation as an adaptation or maladaptation becomes a problem in itself. And there is a period, sometimes a prolonged period, in which actually there is more pain. So thatll be better off in the long run.
Would you accept part of the title of the second chapter IThe orderly disorder of Because I think that is true, that there is an orderly disorderliness, just like some cardiac rhythmss my family doctor alter heres not go so fast by that question about whether theys not just that the work, the treatment makes the pain greaterbut itt functioning so well anymore, and so that brings them into our office in the first place.
And I would say that this is the moment in treatment when it helps to have if not a psychoanalytic training, then to certainly be psychodynamically oriented. Because itve worked with, wet use the word integration, but I do use the term co-consciousness.
Ive often been amazed when people tell me, even though I know, always like this. I Even though this is in itself troubling, it did save the person in the past, and perhaps the present, from being overwhelmed by affective arousal. But one of the things that happens here in the separation of these states is that theres own mental emotional state in a context, in a kind of familiar or reliable context. There is also a lack of an ability to feel that theres a possibility to make a transition, that itt just apply to DID.
Ire okay?
It need it.
Does anyone else need it?
I want to stand up.
Okay. Lets probably a good time to notice how important self-care is in doing this work.
Oh, that gonna take a break.
