The therapist's relationship with parents is one of the most important facets of child psychotherapy, but one of the least emphasized in empirical and theoretical literature, as well as in psychotherapy training programs. Usually it is parents who initiate treatment, and without their support child therapy would be virtually impossible. Far beyond the practical aspects of finances and transportation, parents are usually the most important and influential figures in young children's emotional lives. Yet all too often the importance of the therapist's relationship with parents is not given deserved weight or attention. When a child's treatment depends upon the parent's willingness to continue therapy, the therapist–parent relationship must be considered to be as important as the therapist's relationship with the child. Child therapists will inevitably encounter ruptures in their therapeutic relationships with parents of the children they treat, and there is evidence that suggests that these ruptures are often overlooked or not adequately addressed. In this article I provide a discussion of parental guilt and shame as sources of rupture in the parent–therapist relationship from a psychodynamic perspective.

The ways that psychodynamic therapists interact with the parents of children in psychotherapy take many forms. Goals of parent guidance are to assist parents to provide the frame for the child's treatment and to support parents capacities through helping them increase their understanding of their child's internal world and developmental needs. Although I am focusing on psychodynamic child therapy rather than child analysis, I start by examining the psychoanalytic roots of parent work. There are a few comprehensive reviews of the history of psychoanalytic parent work that highlight the relative neglect of parents in the literature on child psychotherapy, suggesting that a combination of factors led to a minimizing of parent work in clinical theory development. One factor was that the intrapsychic nature of early psychoanalytic theory did not emphasize the influence of parents and the external world on the child's psyche. In addition, early child analysts tended to model their theories after emerging adult models of psychoanalysis, leaving little room for the exploration of parent roles and family dynamics. This translated into a historical tendency within psychoanalytic training programs to minimize parent work. When parent work is minimized in theory and training, it is evidently followed by a lack of focus in seminars, scholarly articles, and supervision emphasizing parent work—ultimately influencing clinical work with children. Without a framework within which to conceptualize the role of parents in a child's life and in child psychotherapy, powerful countertransferences can emerge, such as rescue fantasies on the part of the therapist or a desire to be a better parent to the child than the real parents.

There are several theorists who introduced key aspects of the parent–child relationship. Benedek introduced the concept of parenthood as a developmental phase, and Furman  articulated the clinical importance of this concept. With the idea that parents achieve developmental milestones in tandem with the child, the concept of reciprocal influence—that parents and children influence one another—became important to understanding the parent-child dyad. This process is complex, because a parent's capacities to interact with the child are affected by the parent's own early parent-child experiences, implying an intergenerational reverberation of parent-child dynamics. It is reasonable to assume that even when parental attitudes toward the child or the therapy are not explicitly communicated, children will understand these attitudes because of the extent of their attunement to their parents. The child's awareness of the parents attitudes toward treatment unequivocally impacts how and whether the child can engage in treatment. Contemporary relational theorists also support the concept of reciprocal influence, and further describe the importance and complexity of the parent's role as variously partner to the therapy, adversary to the therapy, part of the system, sources of guidance as well as resistance for the therapist to respond to, a patient of the therapist, and the employer of the therapist. Because children rely upon parents for permission to engage in treatment, how can we not work with parents as part of the child's treatment?


Concordant with the theoretical literature, there is a body of empirical literature supporting parent work, linking parent involvement in child treatment to positive outcomes. Given that the parent is not the identified patient in child psychotherapy, the process of navigating parent-therapist rupture and repair differs from adult psychotherapy. In fact, in a study on premature termination in child therapy, researchers found that early ruptures, unidentified by therapists, were one of the factors contributing to premature dropout, and that parents may become aware of ruptures in the parent–therapist relationship before the child therapist. We are then left with the question: What do ruptures look like in the parent–therapist relationship, and how can therapists be more effective at establishing and maintaining this important alliance?
Historically, psychoanalytic theories have always valued the importance of the alliance and the interpersonal field. The root of the therapeutic or working alliance dates back to Freud's concepts of positive transference , and can be traced throughout the psychoanalytic literature. The first formal conceptualization was the alliance as something that was formed essentially between the patient's reasonable ego and the analyst's analyzing ego. Without such ego capacity in both patient and therapist (akin to the observing ego but also involving other capacities such as trustingness), it would be difficult to establish and maintain a working alliance. Although initially a psychoanalytic concept, the therapeutic working alliance is generalizable to all forms of psychotherapy. The alliance was later standardized for research purposes into the Working Alliance Inventory. The therapeutic alliance has been established as one of the better predictors of outcome regardless of treatment modality , and can be considered a prerequisite for effective adult psychotherapy.
The alliance between therapist and patient has also been likened to a parent-child relationship  or an attachment relationship , and in general is viewed as the grounds for transformative relational work across theories. Specific components and nuances of the therapeutic alliance were illuminated by later research, including the importance of the identification and resolution of ruptures as crucial to the psychotherapy process. Unfortunately, as with clinical writings, there is a dearth of empirical evidence focusing on the alliance (child–therapist or parent–therapist) in child psychotherapy.
In psychoanalytic thought, one-person psychologies tended to discuss ruptures, or resistances, as impediments to therapy (and parental resistances as barriers to child therapies), which needed to be interpreted and worked through. Object relations models later emphasized the central role of relationships to the psyche, and later, Kohut's self psychology focused on how empathic ruptures between therapist and client are inevitable, suggesting that ruptures must be identified and attuned to in order for therapeutic work to occur. His ideas paved the way for relational theorists, whose two-person focus acknowledges the roles and subjectivities of both patient and therapist.
For this article, I define an alliance rupture (between parent and therapist) as a deterioration in the quality of the relationship between patient and therapist; and an interpersonal marker  that can indicate an opportunity to rework deeply rooted relational patterns. There are at least two major types of communication that may indicate that a rupture has occurred. In withdrawal ruptures, the patient (a parent, in the case of this article) may withdraw or disengage his or her emotions or self. In parent work, some examples of withdrawal ruptures might be when parents (even those who were once engaged) pull back by dodging scheduling of meetings, waiting in the car, or being generally unavailable or avoidant of the therapist. In confrontation ruptures, the patient directly expresses dissatisfaction of some kind. An example might be a parent who becomes disgruntled with a perceived lack of progress, or even parents who suggest that therapy could be making the child's symptoms worse. For some psychotherapy patients, including parents and or children in treatment, it is the very process of relational destruction and repair that promotes growth and positive outcomes. At the very least, attention to rupture enables therapeutic work to continue and helps prevent early termination. At best, it can deepen the child's psychotherapy and the parent's understanding of the child.

Parental guilt and shame are almost always present to some degree, yet often overlooked. They are discussed here as one important source of therapeutic rupture in the parent-therapist relationship. While some believe that moderate levels of guilt can be productive and motivating, shame tends to be more incapacitating and may lead to difficult therapeutic impasses. Many have speculated on whether guilt and shame are truly distinct phenomena or if they are simply different intensities of the same emotion. Shame and guilt are almost always intertwined with each other, though each will be initially defined separately. While both are almost always present to some degree in work with parents, it is shame-proneness or guilt-proneness that may determine the strength of therapeutic ruptures. It is clinically useful to understand the experiences of and responses to guilt and shame so that they can be recognized and addressed when they arise, and such signs will be discussed as each phenomenon is defined.
As an ultimate goal of any treatment (particularly parent guidance), it is of crucial importance to transform pathological shame into functional or motivational guilt .
Shame is notably more primitive, more pathological, less conscious, and more isolating than guilt. Some suggest that shame is a developmentally earlier or pre-oedipal experience compared to guilt, which may be more related to superego or oedipal development . Shame induces feelings of worthlessness, powerlessness, exposure, and inferiority. Shame causes people to feel globally deficient, defective, objectionable, and to believe others are angry or harshly scrutinizing. Shame directly affects one's core sense of self and identity, and induces urges to physically hide, shrink, sink into the floor, escape, or withdraw. Shame is also associated with more physiological changes than guilt . Even Darwin observed the physiological changes related to shame, considering them primitive modes of adaptation.
Interpersonally, shame is associated with distancing behaviors like withdrawal and avoidance, attack or externalized anger, and tendencies to become secretive in an attempt to avoid exposure. Emotionally, shame involves more intense dysphoria than guilt, including the pain of having not lived up to one's ego ideal. Often unconscious and too painful to keep in mind , shame may be defended against by denial, avoidance, externalization, or even guilt. Shame causes one to not just want to undo a situation, but to wish to undo the entire self that has been found wanting or defective. Because it is so painful, shame most often hides so that we cannot easily see or find it, though its presence can wreak intrapsychic and interpersonal destruction.
Shame is rooted in one's core sense of self. Extreme early experiences of being shamed by one's parents in early childhood can impair object-relational capacities that will reverberate throughout life , and such early experiences can also create excessive secondary narcissism (an economic withdrawal of libido back into the self). Narcissism is related to the capacity for empathy, a key parental function that is crucial for child therapists to help parents develop during parent work. Interestingly, researchers have shown that shame-ridden parents tend to display less empathy and less warmth. Mature empathy requires autonomy, so that the parent can reflect on the child's experience while remaining separate from it. The parent's capacity for true empathy will therefore vary depending on how much of the parent's sense of self is intertwined with the child's identity, and on the balance between narcissistic parental investment in the child, or self-love, and investment in the child as a separate individual, or object love. Because of this shared identity, thinking about the child's problems or perceived flaws can at times feel like a narcissistic injury, translated into a sense of shame and personal failure for the parent. The balance between narcissistic parental investment and investment in the child as a separate individual will shift as the child and parent grow and develop. An example of a parent whose shame was activated by her perceived feelings of failure is a mother who left a challenging parent session which addressed her unintended but powerful influence on her child's problems. She asked, “I haven't ruined him, have I? I mean, this isn't so bad, is it?” Asking for reassurance simultaneously represented her need to be held together as she faced difficult material which evoked shame as well as her desire to undo the discussion and blind herself again to her role in the family problem.
Hostility and narcissistic rage have also been empirically and theoretically linked to shame. A common defense against rage is for an individual to direct the rage at oneself, the rage manifesting in the experience of shame. Another defense against feelings of rage is externalization, in which shame and rage are transformed into blame placed on others. For parents utilizing an externalizing defense against shame, the target is often a therapist, or more unfortunately, a child. When working with parents, both aggression and passivity may be indicative of defensive reactions to underlying shame. An example of a passive response would be a parent who avoids parent sessions due to scheduling or work, but at another level, to avoid the feelings of shame or responsibility evoked by participation, even if the therapist is warm and inviting. Parental shame has also been empirically established as a predictor for both aggressive or authoritarian and highly passive parenting styles.
Another variation of parental shame manifests itself in parental tendencies to overly blame or place undue responsibility on the child. This kind of shame induction can take the forms of self-serving elicitation (exaggerations of sacrifices parents have made for the child) or disparagement (focusing on the child's burden on the parent). Guilt induction involves latent parental shame, externalized and projected onto the child. This type of parental response to shame is particularly toxic, and has been empirically linked with child internalizing problems. An example of this would be a parent who disparages or attacks child or therapist when the child has a setback or when the parent is feeling vulnerable.
Shame is paralyzing, isolating, and blinding. It causes people to believe there is no way out, and inhibits them from reaching out to or even seeing benevolent others. Parents struggling with high levels of shame will infrequently seek treatment for themselves or their children. When they do enter treatment, and a parent cannot see beyond his or her own sense of failure, a relationship with a child therapist is likely to be swiftly damaged or even severed, often leaving the therapist wondering what happened. In some cases, the ruptures or premature terminations are inaccurately attributed to unexplained parental resistance or borderline parents, without considering the shame-based source.
Psychotherapy with shame-prone parents is likely to involve stronger and more rigid ruptures in the parent–therapist relationship. Ironically, though they are the most problematic, shame-related ruptures can be the most difficult to identify since they are usually well-disguised and defended against. Shame may be easily misread as anger, hostility, withdrawal, denial, and externalized blame. In psychotherapy, especially with parents, addressing these defenses without understanding the shame-based root is likely to intensify shame, feelings of being misunderstood, and shame-related responses. Invalidation from a therapist about such sensitive feelings can be doubly hurtful: there is the initial situation that provokes shame, and then the experience of being in a relationship with a therapist who invalidates, often by omission, the shameful experience. It is easy to see that identifying such ruptures may be additionally complex, but no less important, in cross-cultural dyads, as is discussed in the clinical vignette.
